James 3, 5 and 6 tells us in part the tongue is a small part of the body and yet see how
small a fire it takes to set a great forest ablaze. The tongue is also a fire. Well just how
small is the tongue. An average adult's tongue weighs only about two and a half ounces. That's
a small part of the body weight of a 200 pound man. But that little two ounce tongue has great
power. If you think about it, they can actually lift thousands of pounds of weight. For example,
when a chairman of the convention says, please stand. Of course that power can be used for good
or for bad. And the warning in today's scripture text, if we're not careful, it can cause great
damage. Just like a tiny, lighted match flipped carelessly aside, can burn thousands of acres of
beautiful trees to the ground. Well, what are types of speech that can be like a destructive fire?
Lying, slander, backbiting, harmful gossip and false teaching a few examples. But during our
discussion, let's talk about a type of speech that may be more subtle, more insidious, but nevertheless
is very harmful. What is it murmuring? Let's discuss avoid murmuring. Now what is murmuring?
According to the dictionary to murmur, means to make low, continuous, indistinct sound or
succession of sounds. Of course, in nature, there are many very pleasant murmuring sounds. For
example, it's pleasant to listen to gentle breezes murmur through the leaves of trees. It's soothing
to listen to a small stream of murmuring its way through a forest or down a mountain slope.
But the same cannot be said about murmuring by the human tongue. It is far from pleasant.
One dictionary said that murmuring by humans means complaining in low mumbling tones, grumbling.
The watchtower said that the Hebrew term meaning to murmur can also mean to growl.
We're out in service, and if a dog growls at us, it's not a pleasant sound that draws us.
We want to distance ourselves. Of course, murmuring permeates Satan's world.
Children murmur against their parents. Wives murmur against their husbands. Employees murmur
against their employers. Multitudes murmur against God, blaming him for bad things that happen.
But here's an important question. How does Jehovah view murmuring? We'll open up to numbers,
chapter 12, please. And here's an interesting account. It gives us some insight into Jehovah's
viewpoint. Numbers 12 verse 1. Now, Miriam and Aaron began to speak against Moses because of the
Cushite wife he had married. Verse 2. They were saying, and apparently on an ongoing basis,
is it only by Moses that Jehovah has spoken? Has he not also spoken through us?
Now notice the next thought. And Jehovah was listening. And Jehovah didn't like what he heard.
If you look at verse 9, his anger burned, and he struck Miriam with leprosy. Now think about this.
Of all the diseases, Jehovah could have struck Miriam with. Why did he choose leprosy?
Well, Jehovah doesn't tell us. But think about this. A person struck with leprosy, especially
in Bible times, was made physically repulsive. You could say physically ugly.
Well, by talking the way she was talking already, she was spiritually repulsive in Jehovah's
eyes. So by striking her with leprosy, Jehovah allowed everyone to see what Jehovah already saw
in Miriam. There's another account to chapters later. It talks about how the Israelites began to
murmur after hearing the negative report from the 10 spies. How did Jehovah react?
He decreed that all the murmurs 20 years of age and over would never make it to the Promised Land.
They would die in the wilderness. So obviously, Jehovah hates murmuring. You could say he abominates it.
But now the question is, why? Well, let's briefly discuss three reasons. One, it breeds discontent,
both in ourselves and in others. Jude 16 speaks of murmurs complaining about their lot in life.
And it's true. The more a person complains about his lot in life, then the deeper the discontent
becomes in his own heart. And since murmurs never keep their complaints to themselves,
it shows discontent in others. See, and if you think about this, who was the original promoter of
discontent with one's lot in life, Satan the devil? He succeeded in sewing discontent in Eve's heart.
So a murmur is actually imitating the methods of the devil. And apparently a murmur reminds
Jehovah of his arch enemy Satan. And that's certainly something no wise person wants to do. Remind
Jehovah of Satan. Well, what is the antidote? Cultivating contentment. First Timothy 6, 6, there is
great gain and godly devotion along with contentment. And several scriptures talk about contentment.
And when we count our blessings, we have from Jehovah. See, we can be content, can't we? No
matter what our circumstances now. A second reason Jehovah hates it. It incites hatred. Again,
both in our own heart and in others. Open up to Proverbs 17, please. And here's an interesting
scripture on this. Proverbs 17 verse 9, whoever forgives the transgression seeks love.
But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends. So notice, love should move us
to cover over forgive the transgressions of others. But if we don't do that, we keep harping about
their transgressions, murmuring about them. See, then hatred for that one grows in our own heart.
And how does it affect others? Well, again, it soes hatred in their heart. The watchtower some
years ago had a little article, why keep free from murmuring? And it gave an example. It says,
suppose a Christian starts to complain to you about a certain appointed elder about how he
performs his duties, how he handles his parts on the platform. And it says, if you listen to the
complainer, you can begin to think as he does. Then as you observe the elder, you could be saying to
yourself, now that I think about it, what my friend says about this elder is true. I never thought of
it that way before. See, before it didn't bother you now, it bothers you. Eventually everything
the elder does can be improper in your eyes. But now what is the antidote? Well, like it said in
Proverbs, whoever forgives the transgression seeks love. So cultivating love, making allowances for
others, forgiving them, not harping about their transgressions, but forgiving as we pray and hope
Jehovah will do for us. But now the third reason Jehovah hates it, it manifests pride.
Korah, Daithan, Abiram, remember they murmured against Moses? We've had enough of you.
The whole assembly is holy, all of them. And Jehovah is in their midst. Why then should you
exalt yourself above the congregation of Jehovah? See, their murmuring was an outward expression of
an inward condition pride. And we know how Jehovah reacted in that case. But now what's the antidote?
Humility. See, lowliness of mine. Not trying to tear others down with our talking to elevate
ourselves, but lowliness of mine will protect us. So we've discussed that murmuring breeds discontent
insights, hatred, manifest pride. No wonder Jehovah hates it. But as we said, if we cultivate contentment,
love, and we cultivate humility, these will serve as antidotes to our ever-becoming murmurs. And
we'll be successful in applying Philippians 2.14, which says, keep doing all things free from
murmurings. And it didn't say most things. Keep doing all things free from murmurings. And we'll
prove to Jehovah that we're assets in his organization. He'll want us in his organization now.
He'll want us in his new world in the future.